Well, we certainly have learned much during the past few years regarding Jehovah's mercy, haven't we?
In fact, even just today we've
highlighted how we now have a broader understanding of Jehovah's mercy during the Great Tribulation.
The May 2024 Watchtower stated this,
even after the Great Tribulation starts, it is possible that some who see the destruction of
Babylon the Great will recall that Jehovah's witnesses had long spoken of this event.
Might some who see these events have a change of heart and of quote? Well, it could be.
And if so, we'll be happy for them, won't we? Then there's Jehovah's mercy and welcoming
repentant ones back into the congregation. Again, we've been highlighting this and properly
saw what a beautiful thing. The August 2024 Watchtower stated,
Jehovah does not condone unrepentant wrongdoing. However, he does not turn his back on wrongdoers.
He wants them to return. Jehovah's feelings toward unrepentant wrongdoers or pardon me,
repentant wrongdoers are expressed at Hosea 14 and verse 4. And he says towards such repentant ones
here, quoted in the article, I will heal their unfaithfulness, I will love them of my own free will
because my anger has turned away. The article continued, what a strong incentive for elders to
respond to any sign of repentance. And what a strong incentive for those who have left Jehovah
to return without delay. End of quote. Well, throughout the Scriptures, we see Jehovah's warm
appeal to wrongdoers urging them to repent. At Zechariah 1 and verse 3, we read that Jehovah told his
prophet, say to them, this is what Jehovah of Army says, return to me, declares Jehovah of
Army's and I will return to you. But does our increased understanding of Jehovah's mercy here
mean that his righteous and just standards have somehow been changed? Also in line with our theme,
what thing should we properly tear down and what thing should we desire to build up?
According to Ecclesiastes chapter 3 and verse 3, it's scriptural to do both as needed. Along with
the opening comment from verse 1, verse 3 reads in part, there is an appointed time for everything,
a time to tear down and a time to build up. So then to answer our questions, let's examine
Jehovah's love of righteousness, justice, and mercy. At Psalm 33 and verse 5, the inspired writer
highlights that Jehovah loves righteousness and justice. Also, Jesus' words recorded at Matthew 9
in verse 13, highlight that Jehovah wants mercy, not sacrifice. Since Jehovah loves each of
these qualities, how does he balance what he righteously chooses to tear down with what he
mercifully chooses to build up? He does so by knowing how these qualities work together. Now,
some things just go together. Let's just make it every day real life,
illustrates for some people an ice cream sundae. It's not complete unless it includes chocolate
sauce, whipped cream, sprinkles, and what else? The cherry on top, right? The combination is what defines
it. Well, far more importantly, on a spiritual level, our love of righteousness and our acts of
justice must include mercy whenever possible. Jehovah requires that we uphold all of his righteous
standards. So to answer a question from earlier, James 117 tells us that Jehovah does not vary or
change. And quoting Jehovah himself, Malachi 3 and verse 6 says, I am Jehovah, I do not change.
So then, Jehovah doesn't change, and his standards as to what is right and wrong have not changed.
That is why recent adjustments to our view of God's mercy are just that.
Adjustments to our view or understanding. Have you been able to adjust?
Jesus too loves righteousness, justice, and mercy, and like his father, he does not change.
Hebrews 138 says of Jesus that he is the same yesterday and today and forever.
This means that what Jesus did while he was on earth teaches us about his thinking now, right now.
For example, Jesus displayed intense love for righteousness and justice by driving out the money
changers from the temple area on two occasions. The money changers were extorting the people
and they were turning Jehovah's house into a house of commerce and Jesus hated that.
He hated it. Jesus' zeal for what is right moved him to act. And in doing so, he also demonstrated
his merciful concern for the people. Above all, we see in such actions the love that Jesus has for
the pure worship of his father. And because Jesus doesn't change, he still has the same desire
to drive out what is bad. As the wickedness of this world increases,
we know that Jehovah and his son will always do what is right, what is just, and what is merciful.
At Exodus 34, verses 6 and 7, we find a summary of Jehovah's balanced qualities.
Now it reads in part, Jehovah, Jehovah, a God merciful and compassionate, slow to anger,
and abundant in loyal love and truth, showing loyal love to thousands,
pardoning error and transgression and sin, but he will by no means leave the guilty unpunished.
Well, knowing that Jehovah will by no means leave the guilty unpunished, what thing should we
then help to tear down or send away from the congregations? At the same time, knowing that
Jehovah is merciful and compassionate as stated there, what thing should we then help to build up
and welcome back into the congregation? We'll look at an interesting account in Zechariah chapter 5
as well as some other accounts and find some answers. As we do look for the lessons that we can
apply to our efforts to show righteousness, justice, and mercy. So then first of all,
what should we tear down and send out? The concept of tearing down is not difficult to see when we
think of it in terms of a building. Some houses are just beyond repair and for this reason they
must be torn down. The house and disillustration makes that point, doesn't it? I don't think you're
going to fix that one. Have that in mind as we consider what Zechariah saw. Now Zechariah was a
prophet who was favored with seeing some amazing God-given visions. And what he said describes
real conditions that existed in Israel at the time. At Zechariah 5 and verse 2, we read that an
angel asks Zechariah, what do you see? Zechariah replies that he sees a very large flying scroll depicted
here. The flying scroll was written on both sides and contains a curse that tears down the houses
of wickedness, leaving evil exposed. One side of the scroll targets those who steal. The other
side targets those who lie or who make false oaths. After the house is consumed or torn down,
he next sees an IFA container. It contains a figurative woman referred to as wickedness
who is trying to escape. She is exposed. And the angel treats her appropriately by throwing her back
into the container and thrusting a heavy lead weight over it. The container with wickedness is
then removed from the land. Expose, restrain, remove. The angel's actions leave no doubt about
how Jehovah views such things. What lessons can we take away from the vision? Well, first,
we see that Jehovah does not tolerate wickedness such as lying and stealing. We find scriptural
examples of this and how Jehovah dealt with greedy aiken or what happened with Ananias and
Sapphira. We know there's accounts, don't we? God's word lists many things that Jehovah does not
tolerate. For instance, Proverbs 6 verses 16 through 19 speaks of Jehovah's hatred for a lying
tongue, hands that shed innocent blood, a heart plotting wicked schemes, or a false witness who
lies with every breath and so forth. And Revelation 21-8 speaks of everlasting destruction
for those who unrepentantly practice what isn't moral. Well, next, we learn from Zechariah's
vision that Jehovah uses his faithful angels to expose wickedness. The lesson? Treat wickedness
like Jehovah and his faithful angels do by tearing it down, exposing it, and removing it from the
congregation. Expose and remove. We do not want the conduct of unrepentant ones to take up residence
in our congregations. That is why, since sin is still on the earth, the elders will continue to
remove unrepentant ones from the congregation. Nevertheless, while there are things that we must
send out from the congregation, what must we help to build it up and welcome back into the congregation?
When wrongdoing is removed from among Jehovah's people and they are united together and clean and
pure worship, Jehovah sees this and his people are blessed. Malachi 3 and verse 16 tells us that he
is paying attention and he is listening. For those who properly fear him, he places their names in
his book of remembrance. What a privilege. Even so, to keep his blessing, we must also imitate
his mercy and remain ready to welcome back repentant ones. Like the concept of tearing down,
the concept of building up is not difficult to picture when you think of it in terms of a building.
Now, some houses are in bad shape, but they are not beyond repair, like the one we saw earlier,
they can be restored as illustrated on screen. It's in bad shape, but look at that. It can be fixed up.
With that in mind, when it comes to welcoming back and building up repentant ones, we are
helped to do this when we imitate Jesus and the faithful angels. They have not only witnessed
Jehovah's mercy from the start, but they have developed this quality themselves. Here is what we
mean. When humans were first created, mercy was not needed because humans were perfect. Only after
the rebellion, when the first imperfect child was born, did this aspect of Jehovah's love and
compassion become evident. Jesus and the angels witnessed Jehovah's great love and action,
when he extended mercy to humans who were born in sin. In turn, these faithful angels
imitated their Heavenly Father and showed mercy in helping to build up repentant ones on earth.
For example, Jesus showed mercy to Peter, didn't he, and also to the woman who poured perfumed oil on
his feet. Jesus used powerful illustrations to help us understand the depth of God's mercy,
just reading the parable of the lost son who returned and Luke chapter 15 makes the point,
doesn't it? So like Jesus and the faithful angels, we desire to imitate Jehovah's precious
qualities. All of them. That is why we seek to welcome back and build up repentant ones.
We do this in harmony with the direction that the congregations have received. Now, regarding this
direction, one person who was removed from the congregation wrote to the governing body,
and this is what he said. The fact that friends can now say a simple heartfelt greeting blows my mind.
I have felt like a walking plague walking into the kingdom hall as many friends avoided eye contact
and would clear out of the way. But I get it. That was our understanding up until that time.
Jehovah is an amazing one and only true God. His love is always being manifested as in this case,
to direct you brothers to announce this new arrangement. I look forward to receiving a visit from
the elders. Well, what a fine expression that was. Things do change over time,
but like that repentant when he gets it and see, we get it. Jehovah is helping us to understand
why these changes come and we comply and we love it. As we have considered, Jehovah's qualities of
love and mercy, though, have not changed, but our understanding of his marvelous qualities,
well, this has improved. Each of us must work to learn the depth of his love and mercy and then show
the depth of these things ourselves. At the same time, Jehovah's standards of righteousness and
justice have not changed. Each of us must work to uphold his standards of right and wrong,
like the angel and Zechariah's prophecy, elders today must protect Jehovah's people by exposing,
restraining and sending out what is bad from the congregation. So in summary,
while we do not hesitate to tear down wickedness and send it away, we desire to do all that we can
to bring back and build up those who return to Jehovah.